
529
A Lady: I don’t think there is anything to be added to it.

Blavatsky: Did I make it comprehensive enough?

A Lady: Perfectly clear.

Mr. Johnson:190 I thought the attack on the Roman Catholics was rather severe, Madam, to single them particularly.

Blavatsky: The priests are self-sacrificing. It is not against any particular priest, but such a pernicious system.

Mr. Kingsland: Say simply missionaries, not Roman Catholic missionaries.

Mr. Old: Call them Christian missionaries.

Mr. Kingsland: I think you are quite right not to single out one particular sect.

Blavatsky: Were there any Christian missionaries who were killed in China?

Mr. Old: Any amount of them.

Blavatsky: This Damien, I tell you I was going to start for a collection among we Theosophists just to send him, and the poor man dies.191 I just got some shillings, and he died. Let him be any religion, such a man is the highest Theosophist possible. I am perfectly sure the Roman Catholic Church will not recognize it. They recognize Labro, who for forty years allowed himself to be devoured

530 
by vermin.192 I say it is positively ridiculous. They make a saint of this Labro, and the unfortunate Damien they won’t make anything of. You won’t find a Jain who does not lie in the sun and allow vermin to come upon him, because they say: “They are our younger brothers.” They allow all the vermin to come upon them, fleas, and all the less comely animals.

Keightley: It is carrying the point too far.

Blavatsky: We have Jains among our Theosophists in India, and they plead to me, saying it is a very sinful thing that I permitted our Malay to kill cobras. But, I say I am not going to allow the cobras to sting.

Mr. Kingsland: Better a dead cobra than a dead Theosophist.

Blavatsky: He says: why don’t you throw some powder? He wants me to throw salt on his tail. They could not pardon me, and many of them left because I had two or three cobras killed.

Countess Wachtmeister: Mr. Johnson thought you had taken the Jains’ advice when we saw all the cockroaches about here.

Keightley: I am afraid that is illegal; that would not stand before law.

Blavatsky: We laugh at this, but really it is a most sublime thing—because they are so sincere, they would not breathe. They wear those things so as not to breathe the air and swallow those unfortunate insects, those animalculae; and they sweep as they go along not to walk by chance on some insect. It appears ridiculous; but, really, if you analyze the thing, it is the most sublime thing. They

531
do it with the greatest discomfort in the world, and they believe in it.

Mr. Kingsland: The principal thing is to force out how Altruism, like everything else, can be abused. And the only question for us to decide is whether that is pointed out forcibly enough, or whether anybody can suggest a more forcible illustration.

A Lady: I think it is the most forcible you can find.

Mr. Kingsland: I don’t know anything about Labro, but the majority of people won’t know.

Blavatsky: He is the last saint who was beatified. For forty years he was sitting on the Piazza di Spagna.193

A Lady: I read a piece in the American newspaper about him. A Nonconformist was calling him over the coals so cruelly because he was not a Protestant, because he was a Catholic, and would not recognize his work.

Blavatsky: You see how these Christians love each other? Just as much as Theosophists love each other.

A Lady: As much as you love the Roman Catholic.

Blavatsky: I speak against the system, not against the Roman Catholics. I say, pitch into systems but don’t touch personalities. We have quite enough to do with pitching into systems, because systems are abominable.
