 Keightley: This is an attempt to put forth in plain and simple language the principal ideas of Theosophy, what we believe in and what we don’t believe in, in the form of question and answer between a Mystic and an Enquirer. It is just divided into sections—fourteen sections—each of which again is subdivided under headings—not numbers—but headings with titles, just to indicate the subjects that are dealt with. The whole idea of the thing is to make it practical, simple and straightforward, and not very metaphysical or abstruse. It is more of the nature of a popular book.

Blavatsky: You see, the people ask such extraordinary questions. Anyone who speaks of Theosophy will ask you if you are a Buddhist. Theosophy is not a religion, it is not a sect, and nobody is forced to believe or not believe. A Theosophist may belong to any religion, and to no religion, if he likes. What does it matter? He may be a very good man and justify his name of Theosophist more than anyone else; but people will not take this in their heads, they will come and say all of them that we are esoteric Buddhists, without understanding what esoteric Buddhism means. So it is time to give them answers to the most simple questions as to what we believe and don’t believe, and this thing is one of the chapters. Of course, it is impossible to read the others, but I have taken one of them—for instance, “Theosophical Duties”—and I want everyone to suggest what will be the needed thing. What questions are the 

most necessary? All of you go about, and you ought to know what it is that which the public misunderstands the most, what is that which will do the most good; because it is something terrible, the misconceptions that are in the world about Theosophy. They do not seem to know what Theosophy is.

Keightley: I think the best plan would be that as I read it, anybody who has suggestions to make should stop me—because they will not be able to follow me, otherwise. The section, as a whole, is called “What is Practical Theosophy,” and the first subdivision is on “Duty” (Reads from manuscript.)188

Mr. Williams: Is it proposed that this should be circulated about?

Keightley: This is part of a book that HPB has written.

Blavatsky: I will finish it in a day or two. It has been announced yesterday, The Key to Theosophy. Everyone complains that The Secret Doctrine is so abstruse and difficult, that we will give this and perhaps they will say this one is too difficult. I don’t know what to say. I am putting all the questions I have had over and over again; therefore, I am answering these.

A Lady: I think that is most useful.

Blavatsky: But now we must have suggestions, if there is anything more to say; because, when it goes to press we cannot put anything more, and we have to explain as much as we can all that Theosophy is and is not. Afterwards, people may come and say, why didn’t you put this and that? And then it will be too late.

Mr. Old: There is a statement that the attainment of freedom of individual progress and eventual happiness can only be attained by life experience. Might this not be logically proven without going very far into words?

Blavatsky: How would you do it?

525 Mr. Old: You need a logical necessity. It is a bare statement, and not satisfactory, perhaps, to the inquirer. It has to be shown how individual happiness—which, in the altruistic sense, of course, is based in the happiness of the whole body, of which that ego is only an atom—it has to be shown how this happiness can be attained only by life experience. For myself, I should first go to show that the earth plane upon which we live—or perhaps, this would be entering rather deeply into the matter—by showing this earth is the ultimate of spiritual action, it is that plane on which action ceases and reaction commences, and therefore the dual action is only manifest here. That is to say, the descending and ascending, and therefore it is the only point at which evolution can take place. There is a decided motion or progress of spirit towards matter from the standpoint of the spiritual planes; that is, they are all downward, and there is—or, as HPB puts it in The Secret Doctrine—the angel has desired to be man, and man desired to become an angel. You can quite see what I mean, perhaps? The personality, the incarnating ego, is the only point of differentiation—of individual differentiation—at which mankind are interblended; and, therefore, co-mingle and produce individual evolutions.

Blavatsky: Would you put this there?

Mr. Old: Do not put my words.

Blavatsky: We avoid putting metaphysics. This is the complaint of everyone, that they don’t understand half or two thirds in The Secret Doctrine. What I have tried to avoid was metaphysics in this little book, because if you do put metaphysics it will confuse them, and they won’t understand anything, and there will be complaints again. These things, as I put them, are as plain as can be.

Mr. Kingsland: I think you want a little more connection.

Keightley: Your statement is open to this objection: on the three planets preceding our own, there must be evolution of some kind. You must be careful not to land yourself in subsequent [ ].

526 Mr. Kingsland: What he said is very valuable, but does not touch that point in reference to the question which has been asked, it is in reference to incarnation. The questioner may grant all that, and then say: “well, the man has passed through his earthly life into another plane.”

Keightley: The drift of the question is this: a man finds no satisfaction or peace as the result of his life. He has left189 unsatisfied, then he asks, where is the necessity for reincarnation, if you don’t attain peace during one life? Then the answer is, because it is only attainable by a series of life experiences.

Mr. Kingsland: That is the point Old wants to prove.

Mr. Old: I was a bit too metaphysical, perhaps.

Mr. Williams: It would be a good thing to give examples of lives that have not shown any experience.

Blavatsky: I do not think I have ever met a truly happy man. To everyone life is a burden, there is something they cannot find—any interior satisfaction, or peace of mind. I have never met one man yet who was perfectly satisfied.

Keightley: The conclusion to be drawn from that would seem to be that no permanent satisfaction is possible in material life.

Blavatsky: If evolution progresses in such a way as that, then they will most certainly go pari passu with physical evolution; and what matters it, now that we have all the joys and blessings of civilization? They come and say to us: Christianity has softened the customs. I say, did it? Why, the more civilized a country is, the more cant it has, and the more miserable are the people. Look at England. Where is there more wealth, and every blessing in the world? If they only thought a little bit about the people! Where is there more misery than in England?

Keightley: That is not a direct answer to this question; your

527 assertion is perfectly general here, that the final goal, or peace, can only be reached through life experiences. That applies broadly all round, whether you speak about a civilized country or a Buddhist country. Then you want to give a general answer.

Blavatsky: I do not answer it on the paper. As we speak now, it is quite a different thing. I simply answer to that: there is no man that is satisfied; because, civilization brings outward blessings, but that civilization shows there is every day more and more immorality, corruption, and selfishness. And what does selfishness lead to? It leads to the thing that half of mankind have become: the Cains of the others, which are the Abels.

Keightley: Would you say you have found amongst the Buddhists, people who would say they were perfectly happy?

Blavatsky: Perfectly, they die with as great serenity as they get up in the morning.

Keightley: But are they happy?

Blavatsky: I never saw happier people than in Ceylon where they don’t believe in god or soul. They believe in incarnation simply. They don’t think anything of the previous man passes into this. They are perfectly incapable of talking metaphysics; and, yet, see the effect it produces upon them. Every man is taught that whatever he does he will be either punished or rewarded for. Whatever the cause he produces, it will have the same effects; therefore, he knows if he does something bad, he will have bad results; if he does anything good, then good results will ensue from it, whether it is in this life or another. Now, look here! You just ask every one of yourselves—you have all been little boys—is it not a thing, that when you know you have deserved something, that you don’t murmur as you would otherwise? You don’t feel this terrible feeling of injustice. Don’t you know that, every one of you?

Keightley: That is absolutely and entirely true.

Blavatsky: You may swear at it and be angry, but you will

528 say I have done it. This is the only thing that can lead people to happiness. I don’t know what you are driving at now.

Keightley: What Old is after is the purely general statement here: that the goal of peace is only to be attained by life experience.

Mr. Old: Might I have another try? I think it might be done on the ad absurdum principle, by proving that happiness cannot be attained elsewhere. For instance: a person dies; he hopes to go to heaven. Ask him his definition of heaven. He says: “the place of happiness.” Ask him what “happiness” is; he says: “it is a relative thing.” (Happiness, I suppose, in heaven would be to have everything you want, and nothing you don’t want.) Consequently, it is nothing else than an expression or full realization of Kama, desire, of individual desire. Can this be a condition of progress?

Blavatsky: Even Devachan is a state of exalted selfishness, but this is finite. It is not as theology says, that because a man has been “goody-goody” he will be given a golden harp and be very happy for eternity; there is no logic in it. A man says very well, if I only believe what I am told, I may have the golden harp and sit—I don’t know what they do there; I think, recline on the soft clouds! This is the most absurd thing in the world. A man is taught thus to believe: that, do what he may, if he only believes that because another man has been put to death on his account, his sins are pardoned to him. I say it is the most pernicious doctrine in the world. It forces every man to lose self-esteem and self-reliance. It makes him lose sight of this terrible injustice, that because I may go and steal cherries another will be flogged for me. This is an absurdity.

Mr. Old: Moral responsibility is lost sight of.

Blavatsky: However, I want you to hear to the end, and after he has read all this, then we will have a general conversation, because I want you to see if anything is forgotten.

Keightley: The second section is on “Self-sacrifice.” (Reads.)

Mr. Old: That section is very beautiful.

529 A Lady: I don’t think there is anything to be added to it.

Blavatsky: Did I make it comprehensive enough?

A Lady: Perfectly clear.

Mr. Johnson:190 I thought the attack on the Roman Catholics was rather severe, Madam, to single them particularly.

Blavatsky: The priests are self-sacrificing. It is not against any particular priest, but such a pernicious system.

Mr. Kingsland: Say simply missionaries, not Roman Catholic missionaries.

Mr. Old: Call them Christian missionaries.

Mr. Kingsland: I think you are quite right not to single out one particular sect.

Blavatsky: Were there any Christian missionaries who were killed in China?

Mr. Old: Any amount of them.

Blavatsky: This Damien, I tell you I was going to start for a collection among we Theosophists just to send him, and the poor man dies.191 I just got some shillings, and he died. Let him be any religion, such a man is the highest Theosophist possible. I am perfectly sure the Roman Catholic Church will not recognize it. They recognize Labro, who for forty years allowed himself to be devoured

530 by vermin.192 I say it is positively ridiculous. They make a saint of this Labro, and the unfortunate Damien they won’t make anything of. You won’t find a Jain who does not lie in the sun and allow vermin to come upon him, because they say: “They are our younger brothers.” They allow all the vermin to come upon them, fleas, and all the less comely animals.

Keightley: It is carrying the point too far.

Blavatsky: We have Jains among our Theosophists in India, and they plead to me, saying it is a very sinful thing that I permitted our Malay to kill cobras. But, I say I am not going to allow the cobras to sting.

Mr. Kingsland: Better a dead cobra than a dead Theosophist.

Blavatsky: He says: why don’t you throw some powder? He wants me to throw salt on his tail. They could not pardon me, and many of them left because I had two or three cobras killed.

Countess Wachtmeister: Mr. Johnson thought you had taken the Jains’ advice when we saw all the cockroaches about here.

Keightley: I am afraid that is illegal; that would not stand before law.

Blavatsky: We laugh at this, but really it is a most sublime thing—because they are so sincere, they would not breathe. They wear those things so as not to breathe the air and swallow those unfortunate insects, those animalculae; and they sweep as they go along not to walk by chance on some insect. It appears ridiculous; but, really, if you analyze the thing, it is the most sublime thing. They

531 do it with the greatest discomfort in the world, and they believe in it.

Mr. Kingsland: The principal thing is to force out how Altruism, like everything else, can be abused. And the only question for us to decide is whether that is pointed out forcibly enough, or whether anybody can suggest a more forcible illustration.

A Lady: I think it is the most forcible you can find.

Mr. Kingsland: I don’t know anything about Labro, but the majority of people won’t know.

Blavatsky: He is the last saint who was beatified. For forty years he was sitting on the Piazza di Spagna.193

A Lady: I read a piece in the American newspaper about him. A Nonconformist was calling him over the coals so cruelly because he was not a Protestant, because he was a Catholic, and would not recognize his work.

Blavatsky: You see how these Christians love each other? Just as much as Theosophists love each other.

A Lady: As much as you love the Roman Catholic.

Blavatsky: I speak against the system, not against the Roman Catholics. I say, pitch into systems but don’t touch personalities. We have quite enough to do with pitching into systems, because systems are abominable. 