
Keightley: Then this is on “Charity” (Reads.)

Mr. Kingsland: I think it is better to eliminate all reference to any special sect or creed whatever, and I should eliminate Spurgeon’s name.

Blavatsky: Oh Lord! I must not, because it is a personality, but I do despise the fellow. Very well, we will take out “Spurgeon” and put simply “Fashionable Preacher.” Now I have made two

532 
concessions. I have taken out for Mr. Johnson the “Catholic,” and for you, “Spurgeon.”

Mr. Old: Someone will ask you to take out Buddha’s name, presently.

Blavatsky: “The Most Popular Preacher.”

Mr. Kingsland: I think if you refer to the “Asbestos Soul,” everyone will know who it means.

Mr. Keightley: “Theosophy for the Masses.” (Reads.) Then the last is: “How Members Can Help the Society.”

Blavatsky: This is where you have to give your suggestions.

Keightley: (Reads.)

Blavatsky: Give us suggestions what to put more, because I put only that which comes into my head, and I may forget hundreds of things which you Theosophists ought to think about, and see what could be added. Mr. Cobbold194 came too late, and did not hear the beginning.

Mr. Kingsland: Mr. Cobbold as a practical Theosophist will give us his views.

Blavatsky: What can Theosophists do?

Countess Wachtmeister: Theosophists should try and not backbite their neighbors.

Mr. Old: I think there is a negative aspect to action, HPB I was thinking the same as yourself, Countess. I thought there was a negative side to Theosophical duty—what the Theosophist should not do; that is to say, he should not create any obstructions—which very often he does, unconsciously through ignorance, or consciously through spleen.

533
Blavatsky: Personality is the curse in the Theosophical Society, as it is everywhere.

Countess Wachtmeister: I don’t think it is put strongly enough there, that every evil springs from personality, and that personality is the great curse.

Blavatsky: You have not heard the whole thing. This is only a chapter, and I have eleven more.

Countess Wachtmeister: The first duty of a Theosophist is to try and forget his personality.

Blavatsky: Exactly. How few do it. You just make a footnote, and mark it there. Are not these Buddhist precepts beautiful! I can assure you, if I one day translate them, you will say they are splendid.

Mr. Old: They are very poetical.

Blavatsky: And written so beautifully.

A Lady: They are indeed sublime.

Mr. Johnson: It says there that “attacks made on the Society should be defended by any means in one’s power.” I think that is rather loose.

Blavatsky: We cannot oblige anyone to do anything. We cannot create penances.

Countess Wachtmeister: I think Mr. Johnson meant “legitimate means,” that is what he meant.

Mr. Kingsland: Not in the doctrine of the Jesuits.

Blavatsky: Now, gentlemen, please, some more.

Countess Wachtmeister: You put down your negative points, that Mr. Old was just saying, of what Theosophists should not do. That is later on in the book.

534 
Blavatsky: I have covered all the tenets of Theosophy. I have spoken about Karma and Devachan and the states of afterlife—not that we are obliged to believe in it, but only Theosophists who study Occultism believe in it. This is what I have been putting. A Theosophist may believe in anything he likes.

Keightley: Another thing which has been slightly touched upon is a thing which I have very often been asked, whether vegetarianism is a tenet of the Theosophical Society, and whether abstention from alcoholism, and so on?

Countess Wachtmeister: And then, also, you should distinctly state that Theosophy has nothing to do with Spiritualism.

Keightley: That is stated.

Mr. Kingsland: I think, in reference to this objection, this must be fully answered. He thinks all the literature is not of much practical value. I think I would point out that right thinking is the basis of right acting, and we are not a Charity Organization Society to merely alleviate misery on the surface. Each one does that as much as he can. We believe that by promulgating these doctrines that that will in time naturally work out on the physical plane.

Blavatsky: I say literature will reach ten thousands, where all the money we can get will reach one hundred.

Mr. Kingsland: The Charity Organization, and even legislation, is only working on the surface of things.

Blavatsky: We don’t take any concern in politics, because what is the use of making political reforms with men who are not yet reformed? Let them be Conservative or Liberal, it is six of one, and half dozen of the other.

Mr. Johnson: Theosophy cannot be preached to a man who has an empty stomach.

Blavatsky: Among Theosophists there are far more with

535
hardly filled stomachs, and yet they try to do what they can. I know many of them who have hardly money enough to get food.

Countess Wachtmeister: They would starve in India to enable them to join the Theosophical Society. On joining formerly they had to pay a certain fee. Some of these Hindus have starved themselves for a week, so as to enable them to join the Theosophical Society. They have done it, not only once or twice, but again and again.

Blavatsky: What I want to put are the rules of the Theosophical Society at the end—rules and so on. A selection, of course.

Mr. Kingsland: You mean the objects?

Blavatsky: No, the rules as they are in India.

Keightley: Only a selection.

Blavatsky: Then to give how many branches we have and their names, and everything.

A Lady: I think that would make a very good impression, the immense number of people that have joined the Society, and the number of branches.

Blavatsky: You see, we have one-hundred and seventy-three branches, but in India alone there are one-hundred and twenty-nine or one-hundred and thirty. Now, in America we have about twenty- four, and six which are forming; here, we have six or seven branches in England. It is growing very rapidly, and really, there are as many Theosophists who don’t know what the Theosophical Society is as there are outsiders.

Mr. Johnson: I think that book will do splendid work for the cause.

Mr. Kingsland: Most undoubtedly.

Mr. ——: What is the Theosophical Society good for? Well, we might say to promote Altruism, the answer to that would be. A Christian has done the same thing, taught the same thing.

536 
Blavatsky: They speak a good deal of it in Christianity, but they act mightily little.

Mr. ——: And that puts a stop to progress.

Blavatsky: These people would be just as good Buddhists.

Mr. Old: It is the best thing they know of.

Keightley: They all go in for this fallacy, that their idea of helping other people is almost in all cases confined to the physical. They don’t try to give them actual moral stamina; it is always, “your sins have been wiped out and washed in the blood of Jesus,” and so on.

A Lady: They teach them sectarianism.

Keightley: They teach them hardly anything which has any basis in it.

Mr. Old: The man who trained the fleas to do tricks did a good deal more than Labre, because the one only educates the physical idea——

Countess Wachtmeister: And the other develops the intelligences.

Mr. Old: It shows there is a ray of intelligence in the smaller parts of humanity.

Blavatsky: The Roman Catholic Church did not have that superb contempt for animals always that it has now, saying they have no souls. Read the Golden Legend:195 you will see any number of wolves who have been converted, a dragon who had some sore in his eye, and some saint drew it out of his eye, and he immediately shed tears and became a Christian. It is a fact—animals of all kinds, wolves, dragons, and hyenas.

Keightley: There is the story of St Francis’s preaching to the animals.

537
A Lady: And the Jackdaw of Rheims became a saint.196

Mr. Kingsland: When the ban was removed.

Mr. Old: I have seen a more Christian spirit in some faithful dogs, than I have seen in man.

Blavatsky: They are the most respectful fellows I have ever met with, under any circumstance they will remain faithful.

A Lady: Even with a master as bad as Bill Sykes.197

Mr. Old: Martin Tupper198 says: “What if they cannot rise so high? They can’t fall so far.” Which is quite true.

Blavatsky: What are we to do more? Because there are two sections more, representing 30 or 40 pages.

Mr. Old: I think something might be said as to what constitutes happiness.

Blavatsky: With me, to sit and never move.

Mr. Kingsland: And never have anyone asking questions.

Blavatsky: This young creature sitting here cannot live without air, and air kills me.199

Mr. Old: That is not happiness. I think a person who has suffered physically, intense tortures, may still be happy.
