
Blavatsky: One man is very fond of money.

Mr. Old: It depends where the individual consciousness happens to be gravitating for the time being. If it is in the body, physical

538 
ailments cause misery, but otherwise he would still be happy.

Keightley: There is a certain amount of truth in the old saying: “What philosopher was ever able to bear the toothache?”

Blavatsky: Now what are you going to do with this Burgoyne, who writes a book against us?200 It shows to you the perseverance with which they act against the “Theosophical Society.” I have just received this. Burgoyne as a young man, Mr. Johnson will tell you about him, was two and a half years away for some swindling.

Mr. Johnson: He had to quit the country. He victimized me; he was two years in Bradford Gaol.

Blavatsky: I have got a portrait of him that was sent from Scotland Yard, and he has got on the handcuffs; and there he was taken before {he} was handcuffed, where he appears very smiling, and there he appears with handcuffs—well, he doesn’t smile—and this is the bright and shining light of esotericism in America.

Mr. Johnson: I know perfectly well he is an enemy of the Society, and especially about you.

Mr. Kingsland: How long is it since he was in England?

Mr. Johnson: Three and a half years ago.

Countess Wachtmeister: He had to leave the country quickly.

Mr. Kingsland: For the country’s good.

Countess Wachtmeister: The police said it would be the greatest swindle England had ever known. They were collecting money to purchase land out in America, and the whole thing was a bubble, and

539
they went off to America with all they had collected. They intended to swindle the Theosophist out of his land, and not pay for it.

Mr. Old: I think the best thing the “Theosophist” can do is to prepare a counterblast.

Countess Wachtmeister: There are numbers of people who lost money.

Blavatsky: But this is a Religio-Philosophical Journal. 201 It is the same paper that for years and years has been putting in letters about my habitual drunkenness. You know, they said that I habitually every morning danced on a tightrope for an hour—I never even tasted liquor in my life, because I hate it: there is no virtue in it at all.

Mr. Kingsland: I would like a few suggestions as to letting Theosophists know as to these scandalous things: for instance, there are the monthly papers, there will be some notice of it in these journals, but all Theosophists do not take these journals.

Keightley: There is this objection to be raised against it, that you only advertise a book of that nature.

Countess Wachtmeister: Yes, everybody goes and purchases it. I think the best plan is to take no notice.

Keightley: The thing that will be done, if Judge is wise, is to simply not to refer to the book, but show up Burgoyne as a fraud.

Blavatsky: Then, if there are the same laws in America as here, you told me the more a statement is true, the more it is libelous, and he may bring an action against Judge.202 It seems if you speak the truth you are taken up as a confederate. You are always nicely situated.

Mr. Old: I think if Judge were to just write to some of the local

540 
papers and make a thorough exposé of the man, and just conclude by saying he proposes to publish a book—which will be his book—you could still mention the book, and everybody would fly at it, but they would know how to take the contents in the face of these facts.

Keightley: I don’t think anybody will take any notice of the book.

Mr. Kingsland: Unless any paper puffs it up; then we should write a counterblast.

Mr. Old: I think the great question in America today is, what is a Theosophist? Here is this man and that man, all pseudo-theosophists, who claim to be the Theosophists, representative members of a society which does not exist, but which nevertheless is Theosophical. I don’t wonder at all at the Americans raising the question, what is a Theosophist?

Blavatsky: Hiram Butler founded the Esoteric Society, and allowed people to believe he was a Theosophist.203 Now he has been pounced upon by the police for all kinds of very queer-looking tricks, and he had to run away from Boston, and he went to California.

Countess Wachtmeister: I think all Theosophists ought to protest when they see anything of the kind.

Keightley: They say some astrologers used to say that the stars ruled human destinies and were active agents in controlling human destinies. Others put it that that was not the case, but that there was a sympathetic relationship between human beings and the stars, so that they moved parallel to each other; that you can predict the conditions under which a human being would find himself from

541
the stellar aspects, but it was not inferred that there was any cause of relationship between them. Those are, broadly speaking, the two different views put forward by the astrologer. The old one is the orthodox.

Mr. Old: There is almost a third class of thinkers on this question, that is those who believe in the planetary spirits—you know, that there are legions under them who directly influence the minds of us, the thoughts, desires, and actions of individuals. But my own personal opinion is—and also that which seems to me to be reflected dimly in the Hindu works on the subject, in both North and South Hindustan—that there is a relationship between the terrestrial body, of which man’s body is but a differentiation, and the material bodies of all the planets. There is also a sympathy between his astral body, and the whole astral plane to which he belongs, in which—or of which, I might say—and the astral principles animating the planetary bodies. Themselves are the composites, that is, that the astral bodies of planets and of men all enter into and are integral parts of the universal astral plane. Material atoms either collectively or individually make up the material universe; so with respect to the individual or collective astral. Now, it would appear that the life current, called by the Hindus Prana, radiates, permeates, acts and moves in this astral plane, and that it is in passing through this astral that it becomes stranded, as it were, and thrown off, just as a ray of light.

Keightley: Reflected?

Mr. Old: Well, I don’t mean that exactly; spread out, I mean, into its different parts or principles.

A Lady: Refracted?

Mr. Old: And this severance of the one Pranic ray causes the different aspects of life. Thus we might have a single ray of light coming from the sun entering the earth, and, as you know, immediately stranded off into so many other rays—refraction is the word, of course. So it is with the universal life, which has no particular reference to

542 
our visible sun, which is in the material universe, and is part of it, although it is the most sublimated kind of matter; but it is with respect to the Pranic plane, that is to say, the plane above the astral plane. Then they say that the various astral planets corresponding to the material planets receive the rays of the sun and reflect to the earth, first of all to the astral plane, then precipitated on the plane on {where?} the astral planets receive the life rays of the sun. I am speaking of the sun on the Pranic plane, and the astral planets receive these rays and reflect them to the astral body of this earth, which is in the astral plane, and thence they are precipitated on to the earth, and so into individuals. Now as every person is born [  ] {of?}, as it is said, well through the astral plane, it hence follows that the moment of birth is that time when the individual existence commences, and the person is brought under an individual law, and in the general law which controls the revolution of the planets, both in the astral plane and in the physical plane. And I believe myself that planets only exert an influence upon us through the astral plane itself—that is to say, that it is not the material planet, Saturn, Jupiter, Mars, or any other—which affects us, except physically. But we know they do affect us in our desires; for it can be without a doubt predicated that at any particular time a person will be actuated by desires which are, to a certain extent, foreign to the general tenor of that person’s life. If that can be done—and it certainly can—that at certain times people shall be moved by influences not generally a characteristic of theirs, then we can refer these, of course, to a plane which is certainly higher than the material plane. And therefore these forces—not being physical forces, but psychic forces acting on the psychic plane on the individual and of nature—must necessarily originate in the psychical plane. That is to say, in a plane higher, at least, than the physical plane. And thus its seems there is a necessity for planets existing in planes higher than the material plane, and yet corresponding to the material planes which are visible to us on this physical plane. I think you will see that necessity yourself, because life in itself is homogenous. It has but one quality and that is life; it is only when it becomes refracted or differentiated that it has a quality, that it can be said to have any particular quality. The modifications

543
of life, hence, would be what constitute individual life, very much like, of course, the colours on the prism: they are all light, but it is the aggregate of all degrees of colours, all tones in equal proportions, that would make up the white. It is when one predominates that the white becomes tinged with a tone or a distinct colour. Thus, if more pink were in the aggregate, then the white would be no longer white but it would be pink; so, whatever principle happens to be in excess in an individual, so that person is called either Saturnian, Jovian, Marsian etc. I am speaking, of course, of the ultimate effects of planetary influences upon individuals and how it would operate.

Blavatsky: Occult astrology says that, just as you explain it, but that colours having, each of them, a particular tendency or a faculty of impressing one way or the other what ray that individual will be, so are his passions or desires affected. It is the colour of the ray that impresses. For instance, if such a colour comes {from} Saturn or Venus, if he happens to be born under this planet, then certainly every time that a certain colour—by passing through this astral plane that you have been talking about, and passing through other certain things—assumes a certain colour, this colour it is which affects the individual mentally, and psychically, and spiritually, and all kinds of ways. Is it like that?

Mr. Old: Yes. Of course, we know that we individually are impervious to certain colours. Thus, some people show an instinctive liking for this colour, and a distinct hatred for the other; at any rate, they feel a psychic influence arising from the presence of these colours.

A Lady: What do colour-blind people feel, a psychic influence?

Blavatsky: No. It happens to be a colour which is of a planet which is perfectly contrary to theirs.

Mr. Old: They would feel it on a psychic plane.

Keightley: All that colour-blind means is that there is something wrong with the physically registering apparatus. A man cannot be occultly colour-blind.

544 
Blavatsky: This is the keynote of Occultism, to know the true relation of sounds, colours, and numbers. There are so many. There are seven rays, but what are they? They have got seventy-seven thousand times seven, all kinds of combinations; it takes a lifetime to learn them, and you cannot do it by registering all these in your physical memory. It is a perfect impossibility. You have to use your intuition, and your psychic memory, the memory of your ego, of the astral. You have to register it on your astral form.

Mr. Cross: It appears to me the books you circulate on astrology are rather written above the heads of the people. As an outsider, I can tell you that really, the people who want to know about Theosophy want to know the first steps, rather than these advanced theories. These are very well for your own Society; but, if these books which come out from time to time are supposed to spread the doctrine, I don’t think, speaking from experience, that they really do so much good. They come out along with the others.

Countess Wachtmeister: Could not you give us a series of questions, such as outsiders ask themselves?

Mr. Cross: I should like to know why the person who so very clearly answers the questions so clearly is called a mystic.

Blavatsky: There you are. Mr. Keightley wanted “Mystic.” I said put “Q” and “A.” I wanted to put “Theosophist,” but that is such a name which is arrogant.

Mr. Kingsland: Put “Teacher.”

Blavatsky: No! No! No! It is worse, yet.

Mr. Cross: That is really the objection that outsiders have, that it is vague. Does not the use of the word “Mystic” go to build up that idea?

Keightley: You are perfectly correct.

Blavatsky: What name would you suggest?

545
Mr. Cross: Why won’t you put your own name?

Blavatsky: “H.P.B.” stinks in the nostrils already.

Mr. Cross: But people look to you as the kind of oracle of the movement.

Blavatsky: There is my name there already; everyone would know I have written this. But I would like throughout the book not to put so many times my name. I know that “Mystic” was not good. Now please give me some good advice.

Keightley: “Q” and “A” as an alternative would be good.

Mr. Cross: I suppose there is an objection to using “Theosophist”?

Countess Wachtmeister: Explain what Theosophist is, HPB.

Blavatsky: It is very arrogant, because “Theosophist” we call men who are really holy, saintly men, whoever they be, whatever nation they belong to, or whatever religion. Now, I don’t think myself holy, good, or even learned enough to call myself a “Theosophist.”

Mr. Cross: If you are not a Theosophist, who are the Theosophists? Are we going to do away with the term Theosophist, simply because nobody can live up to the ideal? “Theosophist” is an ideal, not what he really is, the same as Christian might be.

Blavatsky: I think “Theosophist” is better than “Mystic.” They will only say it is very mystic. Let it be “Theosophist.”

Mr. Cross: I feel I am not competent to speak, not knowing enough.

Mr. Kingsland: Then you can just give us advice.

Blavatsky: We are so immersed in this Theosophical Society business that we cannot see things as those who surround us can. The heads of outsiders are a great deal clearer.

Mr. Cross: It would be better if you could have a line drawn—a more definite line—between Occultism and Theosophy.

546 
Blavatsky: We have it, a very great line. I am going to {have} a chapter on the difference between Occultism and Theosophy. Theosophist may be any member of a Theosophical Society. They may study or not as they like; it obliges to nothing; you have not to change your religion, or give up anything. But those who study Occultism, who study esoteric Theosophy, those have, of course, to believe. They must have one belief. Certainly Theosophy and Occultism are different, for an Occultist must be a Theosophist if he would not be a black magician, but you may be a Theosophist without being an Occultist.

Mr. Cross: But why do you bring out these books together? Now, I got hold of a book called The Higher Science; that did me a great deal of good. Another time I had a book called The Black Art, and it was something I knew nothing about.

Blavatsky: If you know about the light side, you must know the dark side. If you know anything about night, you must know what day is.

Mr. Cross: You are handicapping yourself before the British public by bringing these things together, because we know that astrology in the ordinary man is a good deal connected with fraud. No doubt there is a great deal of truth in these old sciences, but you are really doing yourself harm. You are handicapping yourself, so to speak.
