
Mr. Kingsland: You cannot help that, because Theosophy is based upon Occultism. Occultism is the theoretical study of the laws upon which Theosophy as an exoteric thing is based.

Blavatsky: And the laws of nature.

Mr. Kingsland: You must have some law to which you can point as the reason for your Theosophical tenets, and that is Occultism. It is necessary for those who are the leaders in the movement to have this in our knowledge, so that they may meet the opponents of Theosophy on all planes, on the intellectual as well as on others.

Mr. Cross: Then pray let us have it in plain terms. We want no such

547
scientific terms, we want everything clearly defined.

Countess Wachtmeister: Learning Theosophy is not like going to a schoolmaster. Learning Theosophy is by developing your intuition; it is not like having your lesson, just made easy. What Theosophy really is, is the development of the inner man.

Mr. Cross: True. But before you know anything about composition you must learn grammar. What I say is we should know something about the more simple things.

Blavatsky: I have tried to put it in as simple language as I could. Everyone throws it at my head; the outside public certainly does not. I took it into my head to write this Key to Theosophy; two weeks ago I began it, and I am finishing it; it will be about 250 pages.

Mr. Cross: Let us have books on astrology, by all means. Let us have books on Occultism, but begin at the ABC.

Mr. Kingsland: There are ABC theosophical books. We are sending out books which are both ABC and the most metaphysical books.

Countess Wachtmeister: There are so very different minds.

Mr. Kingsland: If a man wants only the ABC of Theosophy, a Theosophist will tell him: “what you want is such and such a book.” Another man comes and says I want to find the scriptural basis of things; there is The Secret Doctrine for him. The only practical way is for a man to go to a Theosophist.

Blavatsky: Theosophy is a very easy thing if you happen to meet a Theosophist who can give you an exposition of it clearly, well, so as to make you understand; but sometimes you happen to meet a Theosophist who will appall you with all kinds of metaphysical terms. Now, for instance, for myself I speak very indifferent English, but still I am accustomed to use Theosophical terms that every Theosophist will understand, but other people will look at me and take me for a lunatic; for us it is perfectly comprehensible, and you must understand that a person accustomed to talk a certain language

548 
cannot come and speak to children. Take a mathematician: he could not. It is extremely difficult for a Theosophist to come and speak plainly to those who have never heard of Theosophy, and therefore, there is the difficulty. I wrote The Secret Doctrine. It seems to me every word is comprehensible; many of our Theosophists understand it, and that which they cannot they come to me about and I explain to them. Every Thursday I explained that which was not clear enough. But look at those newspapers; they don’t understand it, they say it is all bosh.

Mr. ——: You must not take any notice of what the Telegraph says.

Blavatsky: Now, has The Saturday Review even given a single word?

Mr. ——: You must take into consideration it is their business.

Blavatsky: What, to sit on every book that appears?

Mr. ——: It is not a fair criticism, and you must not take it as such. If you write anything new in music or art they sit on it, because they like a thing that they know; that is why music is so popular, because it is like so very many other things.

Mr. Kingsland: Mr. Cross’s contention is perfectly valid; but it seems to me there is a remedy for it. It is not supposed you could select what you could best read, but you will find that you will want to read these very books that you are now condemning.

Mr. Cross: I want a book that will tell me what to read.

Mr. Kingsland: Only someone who has been over the ground can help you.

