Jaina Gross. The same as the “Swastika” (q.v.), “Thor's hammer” also, or the Hermetic cross.

Jainas (Sk.). A large religious body in India closely resembling Buddhism, but who preceded it by long centuries. They claim that Gautama, the Buddha, was a disciple of one of their Tirtankaras, or Saints. They deny the authority of the Vedas and the existence of any personal supreme god, but believe in the eternity of matter, the periodicity of the universe and the immortality of men's minds (Manas) as also of that of the animals. An extremely mystic sect.

Jalarupa (Sk.). Lit., “water-body, or form”. One of the names of Makara (the sign capricornus). It is one of the most occult and mysterious of the Zodiacal signs; it figures on the banner of Kama, god of love, and is connected with our immortal Egos. (See Secret Doctrine.)

Jambu-dwipa (Sk.). One of the main divisions of the globe, in the Puranic system. It includes India. Some say that it was a continent,—others an island—or one of the seven islands (Sapta dwipa) It is “the dominion of Vishnu”. In its astronomical and mystic sense it is the name of our globe, separated by the plane of objectivity from the six other globes of our planetary chain.

163
Jamin (Heb.). The right side of a man, esteemed the most worthy. Benjamin means “son of the right side”, i.e., testis. [w.w.w.]

Janaka (Sk.). One of the Kings of Mithilâ of the Solar race. He was a great royal sage, and lived twenty generations before Janaka the father of Sita who was King of Videha.

Jana-loka (Sk. The world wherein the Munis (the Saints) are supposed to dwell after their corporeal death (See Purânas). Also a terrestrial locality.

Janârddana (Sk.). Lit., “the adored of mankind”, a title of Krishna.

Japa (Sk.). A mystical practice of certain Yogis. It consists in the repetition of various magical formulæ and mantras.

Jaras (Sk.). “Old Age”. The allegorical name of the hunter who killed Krishna by mistake, a name showing the great ingenuity of the Brahmans and the symbolical character of the World-Scriptures in general. As Dr. Crucefix, a high mason well says, “to preserve the occult mysticism of their order from all except their own class, the priests invented symbols and hieroglyphics to embody sublime truths”.

Jatayu (Sk.). The Son of Garuda. The latter is the great cycle, or Mahakalpa symbolized by the giant bird which served as a steed for Vishnu, and other gods, when related to space and time. Jatayu is called in the Ramayana “the King of the feathered tribe”. For defending Sita carried away by Ravana, the giant king of Lanka, he was killed by him. Jatayu is also called “the king of the vultures”.

Javidan Khirad (Pers) A work on moral precepts.

Jayas (Sk.), The twelve great gods in the Purânas who neglect to create men, and are therefore, cursed by Brahma to be reborn “in every (racial) Manvantara till the seventh”. Another form or aspect of the reincarnating Egos.

Jebal Djudi (Arab.). The “Deluge Mountain” of the Arabic legends. The same as Ararat, and the Babylonian Mount of Nizir where Xisuthrus landed with his ark.

Jehovah (Heb.). The Jewish “Deity name J'hovah, is a compound of two words, viz of Jah (y, i, or j, Yôdh, the tenth letter of the alphabet) and hovah (Hâvah, or Eve),” says a Kabalistic authority, Mr. J. Ralston Skinner of Cincinnati, U.S.A. And again, “The word Jehovah, or Jah-Eve, has the primary meaning of existence or being as male female”. It means Kabalistically the latter, indeed, and nothing more; and as repeatedly shown is entirely phallic. Thus, verse 26 in the IVth chapter of Genesis, reads in its disfigured translation. . . . . “then began men to call upon the name of the Lord”, whereas it ought to read

164
Correctly. . . . . “then began men to call themselves by the name of Jah-hovah” or males and females, which they had become after the separation of sexes. In fact the latter is described in the same chapter, when Cain (the male or Jah) “rose up against Abel, his (sister, not) brother and slew him”(spilt his blood, in the original). Chapter IV of Genesis contains in truth, the allegorical narrative of that period of anthropological and physiological evolution which is described in the Secret Doctrine when treating of the third Root race of mankind. It is followed by Chapter V as a blind; but ought to be succeeded by Chapter VI, where the Sons of God took as their wives the daughters of men or of the giants. For this is an allegory hinting at the mystery of the Divine Egos incarnating in mankind, after which the hitherto senseless races “became mighty men, . . . men of renown” (v. 4), having acquired minds (manas) which they had not before.

Jehovah Nissi (Heb.). The androgyne of Nissi (See “Dionysos”). The Jews worshipped under this name Bacchus-Osiris, Dio-Nysos, and the multiform Joves of Nyssa, the Sinai of Moses. Universal tradition shews Bacchus reared in a cave of Nyssa. Diodorus locates Nysa between Phœnicia and Egypt, and adds, “Osiris was brought up in Nysa . . . . he was son of Zeus and was named from his father (nominative Zeus, genitive Dios) and the place Dio-nysos”—the Zeus or Jove of Nyssa.

Jerusalem, Jerosalem (Septuag.) and Hierosolyma (Vulgate). In Hebrew it is written Yrshlim or “city of peace”, but the ancient Greeks called it pertinently Hierosalem or “Secret Salem”, since Jerusalem is a rebirth from Salem of which Melchizedek was the King-Hierophant, a declared Astrolator and worshipper of the Sun, “the Most High” by-the-bye. There also Adoni-Zedek reigned in his turn, and was the last of its Amorite Sovereigns. He allied himself with four others, and these five kings went to conquer back Gideon, but (according to Joshua X) came out of the affray second best. And no wonder, since these five kings were opposed, not only by Joshua but by the “Lord God”, and by the Sun and the Moon also. On that day, we read, at the command of the successor of Moses, “the sun stood still and the moon stayed” (v. 13) for the whole day. No mortal man, king or yeoman, could withstand, of course, such a shower “of great stones from heaven” as was cast upon them by the Lord himself. . . . . “from Beth-horon unto Azekah” . . . . “and they died” (v. 11). After having died they “fled and hid themselves in a cave at Makkedah” (v. 16). It appears, however, that such undignified behaviour in a God received its Karmic punishment afterwards. At different epochs of history, the Temple of the Jewish Lord was sacked, ruined and burnt (See”Mount Moriah”)—holy ark of

165
the covenant, cherubs, Shekinah and all, but that deity seemed as powerless to protect his property from desecration as though they were no more stones left in heaven. After Pompey had taken the Second Temple in 63, b.c., and the third one, built by Herod the Great, had been razed to the ground by the Romans, in 70 a.d., no new temple was allowed to be built in the capital of the “chosen people” of the Lord. In spite of the Crusades, since the XIIIth century Jerusalem has belonged to the Mahommedans, and almost every site holy and dear to the memory of the old Israelites, and also of the Christians, is now covered by minarets and mosques, Turkish barracks and other monuments of Islam.

Jesod (Heb.). Foundation; the ninth of the Ten Sephiroth, a masculine active potency, completing the six which form the Microprosopus. [w.w.w.]

Jetzirah (Heb.). See “Yetzirah”.

Jetzirah, Sepher; or Book of the Creation. The most occult of all the Kabalistic works now in the possession of modern mystics. Its alleged origin, of having been written by Abraham, is of course nonsense; but its intrinsic value is great. It is composed of six Perakim (chapters), subdivided into thirty-three short Mishnas or Sections; and treats of the evolution of the Universe on a system of correspondences and numbers. Deity is said therein to have formed (”created”) the Universe by means of numbers “by thirty-two paths (or ways) of secret wisdom”, these ways being made to correspond with the twenty-two letters of the Hebrew alphabet and the ten fundamental numbers. These ten are the primordial numbers whence proceeded the whole Universe, and these are followed by the twenty-two letters divided into Three Mothers, the seven double consonants and the twelve simple consonants. He who would well understand the system is advised to read the excellent little treatise upon Sepher Jetzirah, by Dr. W. WynnWestcott. (See “Yetzirah”.)

Jhâna (Sk.). or Jnâna. Knowledge; Occult Wisdom.

Jhâna Bhaskara (Sk.). A work on Asuramâya, the Atlantean astronomer and magician, and other prehistoric legends.

Jigten Gonpo (Tib.). A name of Avalokitêswara, or Chenres-Padma-pani, the “Protector against Evil”.

Jishnu (Sk.). “Leader of the Celestial Host”, a title of Indra, who, in the War of the Gods with the Asuras, led the “host of devas”. He is the “Michael, the leader of the Archangels” of India.

Jiva (Sk.). Life, as the Absolute; the Monad also or “Atma-Buddhi”.

Jivanmukta (Sk.). An adept or yogi who has reached the ultimate state of holiness, and separated himself from matter; a Mahatma, or

166
Nirvanee, a “dweller in bliss” and emancipation. Virtually one who has reached Nirvana during life.

Jivatma (Sk.). The one universal life, generally; but also the divine Spirit in Man.

Jnânam (Sk.). The same as “Gnâna”, etc., the same as “Jhâna” (q.v.).

Jnânendriyas (Sk.). The five channels of knowledge.

Jnâna Sakti (Sk.). The power of intellect.

Jörd. In Northern Germany the goddess of the Earth, the same as Nerthus and the Scandinavian Freya or Frigg.

Jotunheim (Scand.). The land of the Hrimthurses or Frost-giants.

Jotuns (Scand.). The Titans or giants. Mimir, who taught Odin magic, the “thrice wise”, was a Jotun.

Jul (Scand.). The wheel of the Sun from whence Yuletide, which was sacred to Freyer, or Pro, the Sun-god, the ripener of the fields and fruits, admitted later to the circle of the Ases. As god of sunshine and fruitful harvests he lived in the Home of the Light Elves.

Jupiter (Lat.). From the same root as the Greek Zeus, the greatest god of the ancient Greeks and Romans, adopted also by other nations. His names are among others: (1) Jupiter-Aërios; (2) Jupiter-Ammon of Egypt; (3) Jupiter Bel-Moloch, the Chaldean; (4) Jupiter-Mundus, Deus Mundus, “God of the World”; (5) Jupiter-Fulgur, “the Fulgurant”, etc.,etc.

Jyotisha (Sk.). Astronomy and Astrology; one of the Vedângas.

Jyotisham Jyotch (Sk.). The “light of lights”, the Supreme Spirit, so called in the Upanishads.

Jyotsna (Sk.). Dawn; one of the bodies assumed by Brahmâ the morning twilight.

167
K
K.—The eleventh letter in both the English and the Hebrew alphabets. As a numeral it stands in the latter for 20, and in the former for 250, and with a stroke over it (K) for 250,000. The Kabalists and the Masons appropriate the word Kodesh or Kadosh as the name of the Jewish god under this letter.

Ka (Sk.). According to Max Muller, the interrogative pronoun “who?”—raised to the dignity of a deity without cause or reason. Still it has its esoteric significance and is a name of Brahmâ in his phallic character as generator or Prajâpati (q.v.).

Kabah or Kaaba (Arab). The name of the famous Mahommedan temple at Mecca, a great place of pilgrimage. The edifice is not large but very original; of a cubical form 23 x 24 cubits in length and breadth and 27 cubits high, with only one aperture on the East side to admit light. In the north-east corner is the “black stone” of Kaaba, said to have been lowered down direct from heaven and to have been as white as snow, but subsequently it became black, owing to the sins of mankind The “white stone”, the reputed tomb of Ismael, is in the north side and the place of Abraham is to the east. If, as the Mahommedans claim, this temple was, at the prayer of Adam after his exile, transferred by Allah or Jehovah direct from Eden down to earth, then the “heathen” may truly claim to have far exceeded the divine primordial architecture in the beauty of their edifices.

Kabalist. From Q B L H, Kabala, an unwritten or oral tradition. The kabalist is a student of “secret science”, one who interprets the hidden meaning of the Scriptures with the help of the symbolical Kabala, and explains the real one by these means. The Tanaïm were the first kabalists among the Jews; they appeared at Jerusalem about the beginning of the third century before the Christian era. The books of Ezekiel, Daniel, Henoch, and the Revelation of St. John, are purely kabalistical. This secret doctrine is identical with that of Chaldeans, and includes at the same time much of the Persian wisdom, or “magic”. History catches glimpses of famous kabalists ever since the eleventh century. The Mediæval ages, and even our own times, have had an enormous number of the most learned and intellectual men who were students of the Kabala (or Qabbalah, as some spell it). The most famous among the former were Paracelsus, Henry Khunrath, Jacob Böhmen, Robert Fludd,

168
the two Van Helmonts, the Abbot John Trithemius, Cornelius Agrippa, Cardinal Nicolao Cusani, Jerome Carden, Pope Sixtus IV., and such Christian scholars as Raymond Lully, Giovanni Pico de la Mirandola, Guillaume Postel, the great John Reuchlin, Dr. Henry More, Eugenius Philalethes (Thomas Vaughan), the erudite Jesuit Athanasius Kircher, Christian Knorr (Baron) von Rosenroth; then Sir Isaac Newton., Leibniz, Lord Bacon, Spinosa, etc., etc., the list being almost inexhaustible. As remarked by Mr. Isaac Myer, in his Qabbalah, the ideas of the Kabalists have largely influenced European literature. “Upon the practical Qabbalah, the Abbé de Villars (nephew of de Montfaucon) in 1670, published his celebrated satirical novel, 'The Count de Gabalis', upon which Pope based his 'Rape of the Lock'. Qabbalism ran through the Mediæval poems, the 'Romance of the Rose', and permeates the writings of Dante.” No two of them, however, agreed upon the origin of the Kabala, the Zohar, Sepher Yetzirah, etc. Some show it as coming from the Biblical Patriarchs, Abraham, and even Seth; others from Egypt, others again from Chaldea. The system is certainly very old; but like all the rest of systems, whether religious or philosophical, the Kabala is derived directly from the primeval Secret Doctrine of the East; through the Vedas, the Upanishads, Orpheus and Thales, Pythagoras and the Egyptians. Whatever its source, its substratum is at any rate identical with that of all the other systems from the Book of the Dead down to the later Gnostics. The best exponents of the Kabala in the Theosophical Society were among the earliest, Dr. S. Pancoast, of Philadelphia, and Mr. G. Felt; and among the latest, Dr. W. Wynn Westcott, Mr. S. L. Mac Gregor Mathers (both of the Rosicrucian College) and a few others. (See “Qabbalah”)

Kabalistic Faces. These are Nephesch, Ruach and Neschamah, or the animal (vital), the Spiritual and the Divine Souls in man—Body, Soul and Mind.
