Tcherno-Bog (Slavon.). Lit., “black god”; the chief deity of the ancient Slavonian nations.

Tchertchen. An oasis in Central Asia, situated about 4,000 feet above the river Tchertchen Darya; the very hot-bed and centre of ancient civilization, surrounded on all sides by numberless ruins, above and below ground, of cities, towns, and burial-places of every description. As the late Colonel Prjevalski reported, the oasis is inhabited by some 3,000 people “representing the relics of about a hundred nations and races now extinct, the very names of which are at present unknown to ethnologists”.

Tchhanda Riddhi Pâda (Sk.). “The step of desire”, a term used in Râja Yoga. It is the final renunciation of all desire as a sine quâ non condition of phenomenal powers, and entrance on the direct path of Nirvâna.

Tchikitsa Vidyâ Shâstra (Sk.). A treatise on occult medicine, which contains a number of “magic” prescriptions. It is one of the Pancha Vidyâ Shâstras or Scriptures.

Tchîna (Sk) The name of China in Buddhist works, the land being so called since the Tsin dynasty, which was established in the year 349 before our era.

Tchitta Riddhi Pâda (Sk) “The step of memory.” The third condition of the mystic series which leads to the acquirement of adept-ship; i.e., the renunciation of physical memory, and of all thoughts connected with worldly or personal events in one's life—benefits, personal pleasures or associations. physical memory has to be sacrificed, and recalled by will power only when absolutely needed. The Riddhi Pâda, lit., the four “Steps to Riddhi”, are the four modes of controlling and finally of annihilating desire, memory, and finally meditation itself—so far as these are connected with any effort of the physical brain—meditation then becomes absolutely spiritual.

Tchitta Smriti Upasthâna (Sk.). One of the four aims of Smriti Upasthâna, i.e., the keeping ever in mind the transitory character of man's life, and the incessant revolution of the wheel of existence.

325
Tebah (Heb.). Nature; which mystically and esoterically is the same as its personified Elohim, the numerical value of both words—Tebah and Elohim (or Aleim) being the same, namely 86.

Tefnant (Eg.). One of the three deities who inhabit “the land of the rebirth of gods” and good men, i.e., Aamroo (Devâchân) The three deities are Scheo, Tefnant, and Seb.

Telugu. One of the Dravidian languages spoken in Southern India.

Temura (Heb.). Lit., “Change”. The title of one division of the practical Kabalah, treating of the analogies between words, the relationship of which is indicated by certain changes in position of the letters, or changes by substituting one letter for another.

Ten Pythagorean Virtues. Virtues of Initiation, &c., necessary before admission. (See “Pythagoras”.) They are identical with those prescribed by Manu, and the Buddhist Pâramitâs of Perfection.

Teraphim (Heb.). The same as Seraphim, or the Kabeiri Gods; serpent-images. The first Teraphim, according to legend, were received by Dardanus as a dowry, and brought by him to Samothrace and Troy. The idol-oracles of the ancient Jews. Rebecca stole them from her father Laban.

Teratology. A Greek name coined by Geoffroi St. Hilaire to denote the pre-natal formation of monsters, both human and animal.

Tetragrammaton. The four-lettered name of God, its Greek title: the four letters are in Hebrew “yod, hé vau, hé”,or in English capitals, IHVH. The true ancient pronunciation is now unknown; the sincere Hebrew considered this name too sacred for speech, and in reading the sacred writings he substituted the title “Adonai”, meaning Lord. In the Kabbalah, I is associated with Chokmah, H with Binah, V with Tiphereth, and H final with Malkuth. Christians in general call IHVH Jehovah, and many modern Biblical scholars write it Yahveh. In the Secret Doctrine, the name Jehovah is assigned to Sephira Binah alone, but this attribution is not recognised by the Rosicrucian school of Kabbalists, nor by Mathers in his translation of Knorr Von Rbsenroth's Kabbalah Denudata: certain Kabbalistic authorities have referred Binah alone to IHVH, but only in reference to the Jehovah of the exoteric Judaism. The IHVH of the Kabbalah has but a faint resemblance to the God of the Old Testament. [w.w.w.]

The Kabbalah of Knorr von Rosenroth is no authority to the Eastern Kabbalists; because it is well known that in writing his Kabbalah Denudata he followed the modern rather than the ancient (Chaldean) MSS.; and it is equally well known that those MSS. and writings of the Zohar that are classified as “ancient”, mention, and some even use, the Hebrew vowel

326
or Massoretic points. This alone would make these would-be Zoharic books spurious, as there are no direct traces of the Massorah scheme before the tenth century of our era, nor any remote trace of it before the seventh. (See “Tetraktys”.)

Tetraktys (Gr.) or the Tetrad. The sacred “Four” by which the Pythagoreans swore, this being their most binding oath. It has a very mystic and varied signification, being the same as the Tetragrammaton. First of all it is Unity, or the “One” under four different aspects; then it is the fundamental number Four, the Tetrad containing the Decad, or Ten, the number of perfection; finally it signifies the primeval Triad (or Triangle) merged in the divine Monad. Kircher, the learned Kabbalist. Jesuit, in his Œdipus-Ægvpticus (II p. 267), gives the Ineffable Name IHVH—one of the Kabbalistic formulæ of the 72 names—arranged in the shape of the Pythagorean Tetrad. Mr. I. Myer gives it in this wise:
  

He also shows that “the sacred Tetrad of the Pythagoreans appears to have been known to the ancient Chinese”. As explained in Isis Unveiled (I, xvi.): The mystic Decad, the resultant of the Tetraktys, or the 1+2+3+4=10, is a way of expressing this idea. The One is the impersonal principle 'God'; the Two, matter; the Three, combining Monad and Duad and partaking of the nature of both, is the phenomenal world; the Tetrad, or form of perfection, expresses the emptiness of all; and the Decad, or sum of all, involves the entire Kosmos.

Thalassa (Gr.). The sea. (See “Thallath”.)

Thales (Gr.). The Greek philosopher of Miletus (circa 600 years b.c.) who taught that the whole universe was produced from water, while Heraclitus of Ephesus maintained that it was produced by fire, and Anaximenes by air. Thales, whose real name is unknown, took his name from Thallath, in accordance with the philosophy he taught.

Thallath (Chald.). The same as Thalassa. The goddess personifying the sea, identical with Tiamat and connected with Tamti and Belita. The goddess who gave birth to every variety of primordial monster in Berosus' account of cosmogony.

Tharana (Sk.). “Mesmerism”, or rather self-induced trance or self-

327
hypnotisation; an action in India, which is of magical character and a kind of exorcism. Lit., “to brush or sweep away” (evil influences, tharhn meaning a broom, and thârnhan, a duster); driving away the bad bhûts (bad aura and bad spirits) through the mesmeriser's beneficent will.

Thaumaturgy. Wonder or “miracle-working”; the power of working wonders with the help of gods. From the Greek words thauma, “wonder”, and theurgia, “divine work”.

Theanthropism. A state of being both god and man; a divine Avatar (q.v.).

Theiohel (Heb.). The man-producing habitable globe, our earth in the Zohar.

Theli (Chald.). The great Dragon said to environ the universe symbolically. In Hebrew letters it is TLI = 400+30+10 = 440 when “its crest [initial letter] is repressed”, said the Rabbis, 40 remains, or the equivalent of Mem; M=Water, the waters above the firmament. Evidently the same idea as symbolised by Shesha—the Serpent of Vishnu.

Theocrasy. Lit., “mixing of gods”. The worship of various gods, as that of Jehovah and the gods of the Gentiles in the case of the idolatrous Jews.

Theodicy. “Divine right”, i.e, the privilege of an all-merciful and just God to afflict the innocent, and damn those predestined, and still remain a loving and just Deity theologically—a mystery.

Theodidaktos (Gr.). Lit., “God-taught”. Used of Ammonius Saccas, the founder of the Neo-Platonic Eclectic School of the Philalethæ in the fourth century at Alexandria.

Theogony. The genesis of the gods; that branch of all non-Christian theologies which teaches the genealogy of the various deities. An ancient Greek name for that which was translated later as the “genealogy of the generation of Adam and the Patriarchs”—the latter being all “gods and planets and zodiacal signs”.

Theomachy. Fighting with, or against the gods, such, as the “War of the Titans”, the “War in Heaven” and the Battle of the Archangels (gods) against their brothers the Arch-fiends (ex-gods, Asuras, etc.).

Theomancy. Divination through oracles, from theos, a god, and manteia, divination.

Theopathy. Suffering for one's god. Religious fanaticism.

Theophilanthropism (Gr.). Love to God and man, or rather, in the philosophical sense, love of God through love of Humanity. Certain persons who during the first revolution in France sought to replace Christianity by pure philanthropy and reason, called themselves theophilanthropists.

328
Theophilosophy. Theism and philosophy combined.

Theopneusty. Revelation; something given or inspired by a god or divine being. Divine inspiration.

Theopœa (Gr.). A magic art of endowing inanimate figures, statues, and other objects, with life, speech, or locomotion.

Theosophia (Gr.). Wisdom-religion, or “Divine Wisdom”. The substratum and basis of all the world-religions and philosophies, taught and practised by a few elect ever since man became a thinking being. In its practical bearing, Theosophy is purely divine ethics; the definitions in dictionaries are pure nonsense, based on religious prejudice and ignorance of the true spirit of the early Rosicrucians and mediæval philosophers who called themselves Theosophists.

Theosophical Society, or “Universal Brotherhood”. Founded in 1875 at New York, by Colonel H. S. Olcott and H. P. Blavatsky, helped by W. Q. Judge and several others. Its avowed object was at first the scientific investigation of psychic or so-called “spiritualistic” phenomena, after which its three chief objects were declared, namely (1) Brotherhood of man, without distinction of race, colour, religion, or social position; (2) the serious study of the ancient world-religions for purposes of comparison and the selection therefrom of universal ethics; (3) the study and development of the latent divine powers in man. At the present moment it has over 250 Branches scattered all over the world, most of which are in India, where also its chief Headquarters are established. It is composed of several large Sections—the Indian, the American, the Australian, and the European Sections.

Theosophists. A name by which many mystics at various periods of history have called themselves. The Neo-Platonists of Alexandria were Theosophists; the Alchemists and Kabbalists during the mediæval ages were likewise so called, also the Martinists, the Quietists, and other kinds of mystics, whether acting independently or incorporated in a brotherhood or society. All real lovers of divine Wisdom and Truth had, and have, a right to the name, rather than those who, appropriating the qualification, live lives or perform actions opposed to the principles of Theosophy. As described by Brother Kenneth R. Mackenzie, the Theosophists of the past centuries—“entirely speculative, and founding no schools, have still exercised a silent influence upon philosophy; and, no doubt, when the time arrives, many ideas thus silently propounded may yet give new directions to human thought. One of the ways in which these doctrines have obtained not only authority, but power, has been among certain enthusiasts in the higher degrees of Masonry. This power has, however, to a great degree died with the founders, and modern Freemasonry contains few traces of theosophic

329
influence. However accurate and beautiful some of the ideas of Swedenborg, Pernetty, Paschalis, Saint Martin, Marconis, Ragon, and Chastanier may have been, they have but little direct influence on society.” This is true of the Theosophists of the last three centuries, but not of the later ones. For the Theosophists of the current century have already visibly impressed themselves on modern literature, and introduced the desire and craving for some philosophy in place of the blind dogmatic faith of yore, among the most intelligent portions of human-kind. Such is the difference between past and modern Theosophy.

Therapeutæ (Gr.) or Therapeutes. A school of Esotericists, which was an inner group within Alexandrian Judaism and not, as generally believed, a “sect”. They were “healers” in the sense that some “Christian” and “Mental” Scientists, members of the T.S., are healers, while they are at the same time good Theosophists and students of the esoteric sciences. Philo Judæus calls them “servants of god”. As justly shown in A Dictionary of . . . Literature, Sects, and Doctrines (Vol. IV., art. “Philo Judmus”) in mentioning the Therapeutes—“There appears no reason to think of a special “sect”, but rather of an esoteric circle of illuminati, of 'wise men' . . . They were contemplative Hellenistic Jews.”

Thermutis (Eg.). The asp-crown of the goddess Isis; also the name of the legendary daughter of Pharaoh who is alleged to have saved Moses from the Nile.

Thero (Pali). A priest of Buddha. Therunnanse, also.

Theurgia, or Theurgy (Gr.). A communication with, and means of bringing down to earth, planetary spirits and angels—the “gods of Light”. Knowledge of the inner meaning of their hierarchies, and purity of life alone can lead to the acquisition of the powers necessary for communion with them. To; arrive at such an exalted goal the aspirant must be absolutely worthy and unselfish.

