Atlantis (Gr.) The continent that was submerged in the Atlantic and the Pacific Oceans according to the secret teachings and Plato.

Atmâ (or Atman) (Sk.). The Universal Spirit, the divine Monad, the 7th Principle, so-called, in the septenary constitution of man. The Supreme Soul.

Atma-bhu (Sk.). Soul-existence, or existing as soul. (See “Alaya”.)

Atmabodha (Sk.). Lit., “Self-knowledge”; the title of a Vedantic treatise by Sankarâchârya.

Atma-jnâni (Sk.). The Knower of the World-Soul, or Soul in general.

Atma-matrasu (Sk.). To enter into the elements of the “One-Self”. (See Sec. Doct. I., 334.) Atmamâtra is the spiritual atom, as contrasted with, and opposed to, the elementary differentiated atom or molecule.

Atma Vidyâ (Sk.). The highest form of spiritual knowledge; lit., “Soul-knowledge”.

Atri, Sons of (Sk.). A class of Pitris, the “ancestors of man”, or the so-called Prajâpati, “progenitors”; one of the seven Rishis who form the constellation of the Great Bear.

Attavada (Pali). The sin of personality.

Atyantika (Sk.). One of the four kinds of pralaya or dissolution. The “absolute” pralaya.

Atziluth (Heb.) The highest of the Four Worlds of the Kabbalah referred only to the pure Spirit of God. [w.w.w.] See “Aziluth” for another interpretation.

Audlang (Scand.). The second heaven made by Deity above the field of Ida, in the Norse legends.

Audumla (Scand.) The Cow of Creation, the “nourisher”, from which flowed four streams of milk which fed the giant Ymir or Örgelmir (matter in ebullition) and his sons, the Hrimthurses (Frost giants), before the appearance of gods or men. Having nothing to graze upon she licked the salt of the ice-rocks and thus produced Buri, “the Producer” in his turn, who had a son Bör (the born) who married a daughter of the Frost Giants, and had three sons, Odin (Spirit), Wili (Will), and We (Holy). The meaning of the allegory is evident. It is the precosmic union of the elements, of Spirit, or the creative Force, with Matter, cooled and still seething, which it forms in accordance with universal Will. Then the Ases, “the pillars and supports of the World” (Cosmocratores), step in and create as All-father wills them.

Augoeides (Gr.). Bulwer Lytton calls it the “Luminous Self”, or our Higher Ego. But Occultism makes of it something distinct from

44
this. It is a mystery. The Augoeides is the luminous divine radiation of the Ego which, when incarnated, is but its shadow—pure as it is yet. This is explained in the Amshaspends and their Ferouers.

Aum (Sk.). The sacred syllable; the triple-lettered unit; hence the trinity in one.

Aura (Gr. and Lat.). A subtle invisible essence or fluid that emanates from human and animal bodies and even things. It is a psychic effluvium, partaking of both the mind and the body, as it is the electro-vital, and at the same time an electro-mental aura; called in Theosophy the âkâsic or magnetic aura.

Aurnavâbha (Sk.). An ancient Sanskrit commentator.

Aurva (Sk.). The Sage who is credited with the invention of the “fiery weapon” called Agneyâstra.

Ava-bodha (Sk.). “Mother of Knowledge.” A title of Aditi.

Avâivartika (Sk.). An epithet of every Buddha: lit., one who turns no more back; who goes straight to Nirvâna.

Avalokiteswara (Sk.). “The on-looking Lord” In the exoteric interpretation, he is Padmapâni (the lotus bearer and the lotus-born) in Tibet, the first divine ancestor of the Tibetans, the complete incarnation or Avatar of Avalokiteswara; but in esoteric philosophy Avaloki, the “on-looker”, is the Higher Self, while Padmapâni is the Higher Ego or Manas. The mystic formula “Om mani padme hum” is specially used to invoke their joint help. While popular fancy claims for Avalokiteswara many incarnations on earth, and sees in him, not very wrongly, the spiritual guide of every believer, the esoteric interpretation sees in him the Logos, both celestial and human. Therefore, when the Yogâchârya School has declared Avalokiteswara as Padmâpani “to be the Dhyâni Bodhisattva of Amitâbha Buddha”, it is indeed, because the former is the spiritual reflex in the world of forms of the latter, both being one—one in heaven, the other on earth.

Avarasâila Sanghârama (Sk.). Lit., the School of the Dwellers on the western mountain. A celebrated Vihâra (monastery) in Dhana-kstchâka, according to Eitel, “built 600 b.c., and deserted a.d. 600”.

Avastan (Sk.). An ancient name for Arabia.

Avasthas (Sk.). States, conditions, positions.

Avatâra (Sk.). Divine incarnation. The descent of a god or some exalted Being, who has progressed beyond the necessity of Rebirths, into the body of a simple mortal. Krishna was an avatar of Vishnu. The Dalai Lama is regarded as an avatar of Avalokiteswara, and the Teschu Lama as one of Tson-kha-pa, or Amitâbha. There are two kinds of avatars: those born from woman, and the parentless, the anupapadaka.

45
Avebury or Abury. In Wiltshire are the remains of an ancient megalithic Serpent temple: according to the eminent antiquarian Stukeley, 1740, there are traces of two circles of stones and two avenues; the whole has formed the representation of a serpent. [w.w.w.]

Avesta (Zend). Lit., “the Law”. From the old Persian Âbasta, “the law”. The sacred Scriptures of the Zoroastrians. Zend means in the “Zend-Avesta”—a “commentary” or “interpretation”. It is an error to regard “Zend” as a language, as “it was applied only to explanatory texts, to the translations of the Avesta” (Darmsteter).

Avicenna. The latinized name of Abu-Ali al Hoseen ben Abdallah Ibn Sina; a Persian philosopher, born 980 AD)., though generally referred to as an Arabian doctor. On account of his surprising learning he was called “the Famous”, and was the author of the best and the first alchemical works known in Europe. All the Spirits of the Elements were subject to him, so says the legend, and it further tells us that owing to his knowledge of the Elixir of Life, he still lives, as an adept who will disclose himself to the profane at the end of a certain cycle.

Avidyâ (Sk.). Opposed to Vidyâ, Knowledge. Ignorance which proceeds from, and is produced by the illusion of the Senses or Viparyaya.

Avikâra (Sk.). Free from degeneration; changeless—used of Deity.

Avîtchi (Sk.). A state: not necessarily after death only or between two births, for it can take place on earth as well. Lit., “uninterrupted hell”. The last of the eight hells, we are told, “where the culprits die and are reborn without interruption—yet not without hope of final redemption”. This is because Avitchi is another name for Myalba (our earth) and also a state to which some soulless men are condemned on this physical plane.

Avyakta (Sk.). The unrevealed cause; indiscrete or undifferentiated; the opposite of Vyakta, the differentiated. The former is used of the unmanifested, and the latter of the manifested Deity, or of Brahma and Brahma.

Axieros (Gr.). One of the Kabiri.

Axiocersa (Gr.). ” ” ”

Axiocersus (Gr.). ” ” ”

Ayana (Sk.). A period of time; two Ayanas complete a year, one being the period of the Sun's progress northward, and the other south ward in the ecliptic.

Ayin (Heb.). Lit., “Nothing”, whence the name of Ain-Soph. (See “Ain”.)

Aymar, Jacques. A famous Frenchman who had great success in the use of the Divining Rod about the end of the 17th century; he was often employed in detecting criminals; two M.D's of the University of Paris,

46
Chauvin and Garnier reported on the reality of his powers. See Colquhoun on Magic. [w.w.w.]

Ayur Veda (Sk.). Lit., “the Veda of Life”.

Ayuta (Sk.). 100 Kôti, or a sum equal to 1,000,000,000.

Azareksh (Zend). A place celebrated for a fire-temple of the Zoroastrians and Magi during the time of Alexander the Great.

Azazel (Heb.). “God of Victory”; the scape-goat for the sins of Israel. He who comprehends the mystery of Azazel, says Aben-Ezra, “will learn the mystery of God's name”, and truly. See “Typhon” and the scape-goat made sacred to him in ancient Egypt.

Azhi-Dahaka (Zend). One of the Serpents or Dragons in the legends of Iran and the Avesta Scriptures, the allegorical destroying Serpent or Satan.

Aziluth (Heb.). The name for the world of the Sephiroth, called the world of Emanations Olam Aziluth. It is the great and the highest prototype of the other worlds. “Atzeelooth is the Great Sacred Seal by means of which all the worlds are copied which have impressed on themselves the image on the Seal; and as this Great Seal comprehends three stages, which are three zures (prototypes) of Nephesh (the Vital Spirit or Soul), Ruach (the moral and reasoning Spirit), and the Neshamah (the Highest Soul of man), so the Sealed have also received three zures, namely Breeah, Yetzeerah, and Aseeyah, and these three zures are only one in the Seal” (Myer's Qabbalah). The globes A, Z, of our terrestial chain are in Aziluth. (See Secret Doctrine.)

Azoth (Alch.). The creative principle in Nature, the grosser portion of which is stored in the Astral Light. It is symbolized by a figure which is a cross (See “Eliphas Lévi”), the four limbs of which bear each one letter of the word Taro, which can be read also Rota, Ator, and in many other combinations, each of which has an occult meaning.

A. and Ω. Alpha and Omega, the First and the Last, the beginning and ending of all active existence; the Logos, hence (with the Christians) Christ. See Rev. xxi, 6., where John adopts “Alpha and Omega” as the symbol of a Divine Comforter who “will give unto him that is athirst of the fountain of the water of life freely”. The word Azot or Azoth is a mediæval glyph of this idea, for the word consists of the first and last letters of the Greek alphabet, A and Ω of the Latin alphabet, A and Z, and of the Hebrew alphabet, A and T, or aleph and tau. (See also “Azoth”.) [w.w.w.]

47
